Mark it.
- ...and set.
- Action.
[hopeful piano music]
I love working with new filmmakers.
I love hearing their ideas
and helping them find
a way to tell the stories
that they want to tell.
It's been quite a few months of
talking to not only Bus Stop students,
also some great
industry professionals
to talk to us about what they think
are really important strategies
for our students to be
able to be industry-ready.
- Musicals.
[laughs]
Going to PLACES, you're in
just very small individual groups
so you can have more
time with a professional
and be able to learn
the particular subject.
- This is slightly hands-on
actually doing something.
CRAIG: Working in the little
silos of the camera team,
and the directing team,
and the writing team
was a great way for
people to really focus on
the craft skills that
they wanted to develop.
- Sometimes all three
would be together
and then sometimes it would just be
the directors and the camera team.
- So we would have
these kind of periods
where we would work separately
but then we would come back together
and we'd find new
things in that process.
It was a nice way to work.
From the start we're
just reading the scripts
and giving some feedback to
how we understand the story
and how we're going
to make it into a film.
I remember when we got together
with the other two streams,
had a table read of the first draft.
There were lots of
questions that people had.
Hearing them defend their script
and their work just made me
feel proud but also like,
"Yes, this is a vibe!"
"Love it."
[laughs]
- And it's not like, "we
can't use this idea at all."
It's more like, "what we
can do to improve your idea."
[clapping]
[hopeful piano music ends]
I don't know that I was
really teaching them that much.
They all have watched
so much film and so much TV.
They've already been
around so many things.
They kind of all
know this stuff already.
They all totally understand
the language of filmmaking.
- ...Ideas, how we're gonna shoot,
while we rehearsal with the script,
come up with the shot ideas
and how we're
gonna do it on the day.
FATIMA: On the shoot,
the writing stream were
the script supervisors.
They watched the split
and had printed out versions
of the script that they marked up.
They learnt quite a
lot in that process as well,
around the details
that you have to be noticing.
A couple of scenes had to get cut
because they were
running low on time
and they really felt like
these were moments
that shouldn't be cut.
And they were active around
finding Dianna, the producer,
and vocalising
why they felt like they
were important to be included.
You write a script when you
write it, and you're writing it again
when you're filming it, and then
writing it again
when you're editing it.
And I feel like
they really learnt that.
The way the directing
stream worked was
we looked at the
script and we carved it up.
And you can kind of see the
hands of the directors
on the different scenes,
but the film does cohesively
sit together as a nice story.
Because we did all these weeks,
we all read the script together.
There was a lot of involvement,
so by the time we
came to do the shoot,
they knew exactly what the
shots were trying to do
storytelling-wise.
- I liked getting
hands-on with the camera.
At least half of the shots
that are in the film
are ones the
students are operating.
- At first I was a bit nervous,
but once I knew there
were people around me,
if I needed help, I
could always turn to them.
We'd spent time in class
discussing headroom
and where the people are,
and they all took all that on board
on the set, and
that worked really well.
[stirring piano music]
It was a full heart moment
watching them on set,
watching them feel confident
to work with the actors
and still hold
true to their visions.
SAMIRA: Telling the actors
what they needed to do
and telling the camera what shot.
- It was fantastic.
Bus Stop allowed
enough of a structure
but left flexibility so
that you can tailor
your class to what
they're interested in.
- They're learning
what they want to learn.
CRAIG: They really pushed themselves
to do something that
they wanted to watch.
The results far exceeded
anything I thought
we were going to create.
Everyone who was in our team
really came out of their shells
the more that we worked together.
They've definitely
grown in confidence.
FATIMA: Seeing them grow to further
their creative development has,
in what seems to be
a horrible world right now,
makes you feel a bit warm and fuzzy.
MARCUS: Not easy to make a film or
like to write a script on your own.
I think I should put myself
out there more
and find people to work along with.
Even anything trying to stop you,
you just block them and just
go for what you love to do.
- More and more experiences,
as you get more hours in.
Everything I learnt down here
I know is going to pay off someday.
I'm just really happy that
they've got something out of it.
- PLACES now really
gives that next step up.
- It's a great way to transition
to mainstream filmmaking.
I just want PLACES to go on forever.
CRAIG: This industry
can have a lot of closed doors
to people who are underrepresented
and we miss out
on hearing those stories
if we don't have pathways
for those people.
That's a wrap!
- That's a wrap people.
[clapping & cheering]
Well done everyone,
thank you so much.